: We ; . : 
| og NG | | 


APPROVED FOR 
RELEASEL DATE: 
25-Jan-2011 


Iraq’s Weapons of Mass 


Destruction Programs 


September 2002 


Summary 


) Iraq—which has the expertise, facilities, and equipment to expand its WMD 


arsenal—is working to reconstitute prohibited WMD programs. 


Since December 1998, Baghdad has refused to allow UN inspectors into Iraq as 
required by UN Security Council resolutions; in the absence of such inspections, 
Iraq's ability to work on prohibited programs without risk of discovery has increased. 


Iraq has stockpiles of CW and BW agents and munitions and is rebuilding its dual-use 


-t. 304 ate abslianns AF 
piuduciiun Tavinuce, Blvanig, Daguuau saa Vapauis avy wes Brocco lawns anantitiag ¢ af 


agents quickly. Additionally, Iraq is aggressively pursuing delivery platforms— 
including UAVs—for chemical and biological agents. 


Iraq is developing a ballistic missile capability that exceeds the UN imposed 150-km 
range limitation and probably retains a small force of prohibited Scud-variant missiles 
and launchers and is developing two short-range ballistic missile systems that could 
violate UN-imposed range restrictions. Currently, all of these Iraqi weapons could 
have warheads that deliver chemical or biological agents. Iraq admitted filling some 
of its Scud warheads with either chemical or biological agents in 1991. 


Iraq still has much of the. infrastructure needed to pursue its goal of building a nuclear . 
weapon, although it is unlikely to produce indigenously enough weapons-grade 
material for a deliverable nuclear weapon until the last half this decade. Baghdad 
could shorten the acquisition timeline significantly if it were able to procure fissile 
material abroad. Baghdad could have procured nuclear weapons related materials and 
equipment without detection. 


Iraq has been able to import dual-use, WMD-related equipment and material through 
procurements both within and outside the UN sanctions regime. Baghdad diverts 
some of the $10 billion worth of goods now entering Iraq every year for humanitarian - 
needs to support the military and WMD programs. 


Pied 


Iraq’s Weapons of Mass Destruction Programs 


In April 1991, the UN Security Council enacted Resolution 687 requiring Iraq to declare, 
destroy, or render harmless its weapons of mass destruction (WMD) arsenal and 
production infrastructure under UN or International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) | 
supervision. UN Security Council Resolution (UNSCR) 687 also demanded that Iraq 
forgo the future development or acquisition of WMD. 


Baghdad’s determination to hold onto a sizeable remnant of its arsenal, agents, 
eaninment, and exnertise has led to vears of dissembling and oahstriction of TIN 
inspections. Elite Iraqi security services orchestrated an extensive concealment and 
deception campaign to hide incriminating documents and material that precluded 
resolution of key issues in each WMD category: Iraq’s missile, chemical warfare (CW), 
biological warfare (BW), and nuclear programs. 


e Iraqi obstructions prompted the Security Council to pass several subsequent 
resolutions demanding that Baghdad comply with its obligations to cooperate with the 
inspection process and to provide United Nations Special Commission (UNSCOM) 
and IAEA officials immediate and unrestricted access to any site they wished to 
inspect. 


e While outwardly maintaining the facade of cooperation, Iraqi officials frequently 
denied or substantially delayed access to facilities, personnel, and documents in an 
effort to conceal critical information about their WMD programs. 


Successive Iraqi declarations on Baghdad’s pre-Gulf war WMD programs gradually 
became more accurate between 1991 and 1998 but only because of sustained pressure 
from UN sanctions, coalition military force, and vigorous and robust inspections 
facilitated by information from cooperative countries. Nevertheless, Iraq never has 
fully accounted for major gaps and inconsistencies in its declarations and has 
provided no credible proof that it has completely destroyed its weapons stockpiles 
and production infrastructure. 


e Despite the destruction of most of its prohibited ballistic missiles and some Gulf war- 
era chemical and biological munitions, Iraq probably still has a small force of Scud- 
variant missiles, chemical precursors, biological seed stock, and thousands of 
munitions suitable for chemical and biological agents. 


¢ Iraq has managed to preserve and in some cases even enhance the infrastructure and 
expertise necessary for WMD production and has used that capability to maintain a 
stockpile and possibly to increase its size and sophistication. 


Since December 1998, Baghdad has refused to allow United Nations inspectors into Iraq 
as required by the Security Council resolutions. Technical monitoring systems installed 


UN Securlty Council Resotutions and Provisions for Inspections 
and Monitoring: Theory and Practice 


pmsolinbon Recuireinem . Reality 


eee 


Sa Baghdad, {oidsea a on: 
Seems plications 610 Geta 
‘did not atlect facie iors 10,co ait 
saan ICEL ea vel Soe pols 


aS CLONM OO NT 


a 198 9: Sa ed with oc 
4 WER UNS COM EX 


net ish eae beckit 


eon aoe aera 1 all spec 


f ~, 
diatoly any, attempt ampt'to cea es ‘or 
mate glial of requipm 


ecu jeer 8 (Hk Otc ar ACT ae = ‘tou 


tl eee Seon Munmenas et ecaiedt 


Along term fing of tradi WMO: sites ‘but occas Gian onsineiad aces exited 
Ss ams; are aie aphaie dala lens cold RL ATUNGCES trish tig ean etastUNSCOM dineATSMON Od 
and, 707, 10F 0nd (6 Oring ast ie List ne ams, 


| ed's 'WAD pic Pee OS; doas tial have ga rtes end Re 
es fuer current ON fesobtions eran rate ae 


fee 


NT rerh TRIS AP eae, ae x 
Relea lor a bald x 


Cubase 


ee 8 i ae See 
UNSC Sy eed ae actions and endorses Ihe Secretary. | complanc ‘retiised to"wort 
aS ane ae ae ieee 
ey be more. Sym 


ee 4 a Ue and} 
ae seein hee saree 


th aE vet He 


by the UN at known and suspected WMD and missile facilities in Iraq no longer operate. 
Baghdad prohibits Security Council-mandated monitoring overflights of Iraqi facilities 
by United Nations aircraft and helicopters. Similarly, Iraq curtailed most IAEA 
inspections since 1998, allowing the IAEA to visit annually only a very small number of 
sites to safeguard Iraq's stockpile of uranium oxide, 


In the absence of inspectors, Baghdad’s ability to work on prohibited programs . 
without risk of discovery has increased, and there is substantial evidence that Iraq is 
reconstituting prohibited programs. 


° Activities since 1998 clearly show that Baghdad has used the absence of UN 


ween cee DBD ce mee DD Ai nbd ent Dae nt nan ned Fn nlllieiann 


- 2 
iSprciuis tw ipair ane VaApain SAMAR I EAR ARE EW REAN ERE NR AABELLL A AON TAN pr LAADe Deewana Rly 


and to increase its ability to produce WMD. 


al i 
ae 4 sony y 
eee toxin: 


By re 
HATEM hammadi diya take 
Anne 


“4 


' Bacillus subtilis is commonly used as a simulant for B. anthracis. 


e Iraq has expanded trade with the outside world and has gained steadily growing 
access to specialized and dual-use technology and materials that could be diverted to 
prohibited programs, as well as access to foreign expertise in WMD delivery systems. 


e Inrecent years, Baghdad has diverted goods contracted under the Oil-for-Food 
program for military purposes and has increased solicitations and dual-use 
procurements—outside the Oil-for-Food process—that almost certainly are going to 
prohibited WMD and other weapons programs, 


Biological Weapons Program . 

Iraq has the capability to convert quickly legitimate vaccine and biopesticide plants 
to BW production and already may have done so. This capability is particularly 
troublesome because Iraq has a record of concealing its BW activities and lying about the 
existence of its offensive BW program. 


Two R-400A bombs in foreground photographed by UNSCOM Inspectors at Murasana Airfield near the Al Walid 
Alrbase in late 1991 bear markings indicating they were to be filled with botulinum toxin. Other bombs appear to have | 
markings consistent with binary chemical agent fill. This evidence contradicted traq’s declarations that It did not deploy 
BW munitions to operational alrbases and that {t destroyed all BW bombs In July 1991—declarations that were 
subsequently retracted in the face of overwhelming evidence to the contrary. 


LL Pe TN SSS ss 


Iraq: Declared BW-Related Sites 


® 


: Al 
Muhammadiyat 


Research/production/ 
filling 


Destroyed by Iraq 
Testing 
Weapon deployment 


20 40 Kiometers 


g 20 40 Miles 


ft 
Al Mansuriyah Vy 
Railway } 

-- Tunnel \; 


Khan Bani 


ScP 
> Tigris Canal © 
"Dane es a= ¢, a 


Saad Airfield 


9o% BAGHDAD p. fh Foot and th D, 

ee Bony for iuecee a&BA awrah Foot and Mou iseas 

Production’@ of Veterinary. z 
‘Vaccines ind Drugs * 


i Vaccine Production Plant 
— Pak 


“Or 


mirlyah Seruin and A ny 
Vaccine institute ©. 


Al Azizlyah 
& “ha 


Ws 


FA, 


eaten yu graeme’ 


7 peeYD 18 8 
a 


® Not declared by rag. Two bombs marked for BW were 
seen In October 1991 UNSCOM Inspection photos. 


OI Cartography Center/MPG 760132AI (RO0B46) 9-02 


After four years of claiming that they had conducted only “small-scale, defensive”: 
research, Iraqi officials finally admitted in 1995 to production and weaponization of 
biological agents. The Iraqis admitted this only after being faced with evidence of their 
procurement of a large volume of growth media and the defection of Husayn Kamil, 
former director of Iraq’s military industries. 


e Iraq admitted producing thousands of liters of the BW agents anthrax,” botulinum 
toxin, (which paralyzes respiratory muscles and can be fatal within 24 to 36 hours) 
and aflatoxin, (a potent carcinogen that can attack the liver, killing years after 
ingestion) and preparing BW-filled Scud-variant missile warheads, aerial bombs,:and 
aircraft spray tanks before the Gulf war. 


Baghdad did not provide persuasive evidence to support its claims that it unilaterally 
destroyed its BW agents and munitions. Experts from UNSCOM assessed that 


Baghdad’s declarations vastly understated the production of biological agents and 
estimated that Iraq actually produced two-to-four times the amount of agent that it — 


acknowledged producing, including Bacillus anthracis—the causative agent of: 
anthrax—and botulinum toxin. 


Current concerns about the BW program are amplified by the improvement or expansion 
of a number of nominally-“civilian”’ facilities that were directly associated with biological 
weapons. 


e The al-Dawrah Foot and Mouth Disease Vaccine Facility is one of two known 
Biocontainment Level-3 facilities in Iraq with an extensive air handling and filtering 
system. Iraq admitted that before the Gulf war that Al-Dawrah was a BW agent 
production facility. UNSCOM attempted to render it useless for BW agent 
production in 1996 but left some production equipment in place because UNSCOM 
could not prove it was connected to previous BW work. In 2001, Iraq announced it 
would begin renovating the plant without UN approval, ostensibly to produce a 
vaccine to combat a foot-and-mouth disease outbreak. In fact, Iraq easily can import 
all the foot and mouth vaccine it needs through the UN. 


e The Amiriyah Serum and Vaccine Institute is an ideal cover location for BW 
research, testing, production, and storage. UN inspectors discovered documents 
related to BW research at this facility, some showing that BW cultures, agents, and 
equipment were stored there during the Gulf war. Of particular concern is the plant’s 
new storage capacity, which greatly exceeds Iraq’s needs for legitimate medical 
storage. : 


e The Fallujah II Castor Oil Production Plant is situated on a large complex with an 
historical connection to Iraq’s CW program. Of immediate BW concern is the 


? An infectious dose of anthrax is about 8,000 spores or less than one-millionth of a gram in anon immuno- _ 
compromised person. Inhalation anthrax historically has been 100 percent fatal within five to seven days, 


although in recent cases aggressive medical treatment has reduced the fatality rate. 


8 


- i} 


IRAQ; Fallujah fll 


potential production of ricin toxin.’ Castor bean pulp, left over from castor oil 
production, can be used to extract ricin toxin. Iraq admitted to UNSCOM that it 
manufactured ricin and field-tested it in artillery shells before the Gulf war. Iraq 
operated this plant for legitimate purposes under UNSCOM scrutiny before 1998 
when UN inspectors left the country. Since 1999, Iraq has rebuilt major structures 
destroyed during Operation Desert Fox. Iraqi officials claim they are making castor 
oil for brake fluid, but the verification of such claims without UN inspections is 
impossible, 


In addition to questions about activity at known facilities, there are compelling reasons 
to be concerned about BW activity at other sites and in mobile production units and 
laboratories. Baghdad has pursued a mobile BW research and production capability to 
better conceal its program. 


‘e UNSCOM uncovered a document on Iraqi Military Industrial Commission letterhead 


indicating that Iraq was interested in developing mobile fermentation units, and an 
Iraqi scientist admitted to UN inspectors that Iraq was trying to move in the Poirechon 
of mobile BW production. 


> Ricin can cause multiple organ failure within one or two days after inhalation. 


e Various press reports have cited-evidence of ongoing Iraqi efforts to procure mobile 
BW laboratories that could be used for research and development. 


Chemical Weapons Programs 


4 


Iraq has the ability to produce chemical warfare agents within its chemical industry 
and now is expanding its infrastructure, under cover of civilian industries, that it 


could use to advance its CW production capability. .During the 1980s Saddam had a 


formidable CW capability that he used against Iranians and against Iraq’s Kurdish 
population. Iraqi forces killed or injured more than 20,000 people in multiple attacks, 
delivering chemical agents (including mustard agent’ and the nerve agents sarin and 
tabun’) in aeriai bombs, iZZmm rockets, and aruiliery sieiis against uth iaviival uuiiiiaty 
targets and restive segments of Iraq’s Kurdish population. Before the 1991 Gulf war, 
Baghdad had a large stockpile of chemical munitions and a robust indigenous production 


capacity. 


Although precise information is lacking, human rights organizations have received 
plausible accounts from Kurdish villagers of even more Iraqi chemical attacks against 
civilians in the 1987 to 1988 time frame—with some attacks as late as October 1988—in 


_ areas close to the Iranian and Turkish borders. 


ADA terti 3. 
ay per ieabe ae Bee 


Be Nee gp 


* Mustard is a blister agent that causes medical casualties by blistering or burning exposed skin, eyes, 
lungs, and mucous membranes within hours of exposure. It is a persistent agent that can remain a hazard 
for days. ; a 

> Sarin, cyclosarin, and tabun are G-series nerve agents that can act within seconds of absorbtion through 
the skin or inhalation. These agents overstimulate muscles or glands with messages transmitted from 
nerves, causing convulsions and loss of consciousness. Tabun is persistent and can remain a hazard for 


’ days. Sarin and cyclosarin are not persistent and pose more of an inhalation hazard than a skin hazard. 


10 


Chemical-Filled Munitions Declared by Iraq 


" fraqi 250-gauge 
chemical bomb. 


traqi DB-2 
chemical bob. 


traqi 155-mm 
chemical shell. 


122-mm rockets 
filled with the 
chemical nerve 
agent sarin prior 
to destruction. 


11 


fraqi 500-gauge 


chemical bombs. 


traqi R-400 
chemical bombs. 


traqi Af Husayn 
chemicat 
warheads. 


a 


lraq: CW-Related Production Facilities and 
Alcohol-Filled or 


at Es: 


SOUT AIT Mase q 


(Qayarrah Wesi) } f 


Al Fallujah ill 
(Al Habbaniyah i} 
Fallujah M 
aflujat 
rine 
: Qadisii weet i ee 
(Asad) 
Murasana 3 


Airfield 37 . 
Saad : 
Airbase i Air ase | Muhammad} 


<9 
aswana 2) itv HE 
Atha)” = Muhammadiyat ae 
(Gubaysahy) (At Taqaddum) 


Tatha Airbase 
{Mudaysis) fi A / 
Ukhaydir 
(Karbala) 


Binary rans 
(Alcohol) Nerve 
Artillery rocket/shell = — f 
Missile warhead ¢g g 


[ar CW-related production facilities 
§ Tear gas bomb 


Declared Sites of Deployed 


Chemical Agent-Filled Munitions During Desert Storm 


a : ae 


« f 


Karkuk, 


AS Tuz Airbase 
qi uz Khurmatu) 


Zs Al Mutasim 
Airbase 
(Samarra East) 


AU Fallujah 
Fote 


_ An Nasitiyah 
* (An Nasinyah SW 5 


Khamisiyah 
(allah) p 


Iraqi alcohol-filled bombs and missife warheads 
were simple binaty nerve agent munitions in 


| which a second ingredient would be added to 
‘| the alcohol within the munition to form nerve 


| agent shortly before firing the weapon. 


os 


<7 


Dl Cartography Center/MPG 760101Al (R00667) 8-02 


12, 


RrepresentUS namesse 


: Fallujah Ut 


« UNSCOM supervised the destruction of more than 40,000 chemical munitions, nearly 
500,000 liters of chemical agents, 1,800,000 liters of chemical precursors, and seven 
different types of delivery systems including ballistic missile warheads. 


More than 10 years after the Gulf war, gaps in Iraqi accounting and current production 
capabilities strongly suggest that Iraq maintains a stockpile of chemical agents, probably 
VX°, sarin, cyclosarin’, and mustard. 


_@. Iraq probably has concealed precursors, production equipment, documentation, 
and other items necessary for continuing its CW effort. Baghdad never supplied 
adequate evidence to support its claims that it destroyed all of its CW agents and 
munitions. Thousands of tons of chemical precursors and tens of thousands of 
unfilled munitions, including Scud-variant missile warheads, remain unaccounted for. 


¢ UNSCOM discovered a document at Iraqi Air Forces headquarters in July 1998 - 
showing that Iraq overstated by at least 6,000 the number of chemical bombs it told 
the UN it had used during the Iran-Iraq war—bombs that still are unaccounted for. 


° VX is a V-series nerve agent that is similar to but more advanced than G-series nerve agents in that it 
_causes the same medical effects but is more toxic and much more persistent. Thus, it poses a far greater 
skin hazard than G-series agents. VX could be used for long-term contamination of territory. 
7 See footnote 5. : . 


13 


e Iraq has not accounted for 26,500 artillery rockets that in the past were its preferred 
means for delivering nerve agents, nor has it accounted for about 550 artillery shells 


filled with mustard agent. 


Baghdad continues to rebuild and expand dual-use infrastructure that it could 
divert quickly to CW production. The best examples are the chlorine and pheno! plants 
at the Fallujah II facility. Both chemicals have legitimate civilian uses but also are raw 
materials for the synthesis. of precursor chemicals used to produce blister and nerve 
agents. Iraq has three other chlorine plants that have much higher capacity for civilian 
production; these plants and Iraqi imports are more than sufficient to meet Iraq’s civilian 
needs for waier ucaunent. OF die 15 wuitlivn ky uf Uniuiine napurivd uuder ihe UN Cie 
for-Food program since 1997, Baghdad used only 10 million kg and has 5 million kg in 
stock, suggesting that some domestically produced chlorine has been diverted to such 


proscribed activities as CW agent production. 


e Fallujah II was one of Iraq’s principal CW precursor production facilities before the 
Gulf war. In the last two years the Iraqis have upgtaded the facility and brought in 
new chemical reactor vessels and shipping containers with a large amount of 
production equipment. They have expanded chlorine output far beyond pre-Gulf war 
production levels—capabilities that they could divert quickly to CW production. Iraq 
is seeking to purchase CW agent precursors and applicable production equipment and 

-is trying to hide the activities of the Fallujah plant. 


Nuclear Weapons Program 


More than ten years of sanctions and the loss of niuch of Iraq’s physical nuclear 
infrastructure under [AEA oversight have not diminished Saddam’s interest in acquiring 
or developing nuclear weapons. Iraq had an advanced nuclear weapons development 
program before the Gulf war that focused on building an implosion-type weapon using 
highly enriched uranium. Baghdad was attempting a variety of uranium enrichment 
techniques, the most successful of which were the electromagnetic isotope separation 
(EMIS) and gas centrifuge programs. After its invasion of Kuwait, Iraq initiated a crash 
program to divert IAEA-safeguarded, highly enriched uranium from its Soviet and 
French-supplied reactors, but the onset of hostilities ended this effort. Iraqi declarations 
and the UNSCOM/IAEA inspection process revealed much of Iraq’s nuclear weapons 
efforts, but Baghdad still has not provided complete information on all aspects of its 
nuclear weapons program. 


e Iraq has withheld important details relevant to its nuclear program, including 
procurement logs, technical documents, experimental data, accounting of materials, 
and foreign assistance. 


e Baghdad also continues to withhold other data about enrichment techniques, foreign 
procurement, weapons design, and the role of Iraqi security services in concealing its 
nuclear facilities and activities. 


14 


Before its departure from Iraq, the IAEA made significant strides toward dismantling 
Iraq’s nuclear-weapons program and unearthing the nature and scope of Iraq’s past 
nuclear activities. In the absence of inspections, however, Iraq easily could have begun 
to reconstitute its nuclear program and to unravel the IAEA’s hard-eamed 
accomplishments. ; 


Iraq retains its cadre of nuclear scientists and technicians, its program documentation, and 
sufficient dual-use manufacturing capabilities to support a reconstituted nuclear weapons 
program. Iraqi media have reported numerous meetings between Saddam and nuclear 
scientists over the past two years, signaling his continued interest in reviving a nuclear 


nrenarany 
revooqoe: 


-Iraq’s expanding international trade provides growing access to nuclear-related 
technology and materials and potential access to foreign nuclear expertise. An increase 
in dual-use procurement activity in recent years is likely to be supporting a reconstituted 
nuclear-weapons program. 


e The acquisition of sufficient fissile material is Iraq’s principal hurdle in developing a 
nuclear weapon. 


e = Jraq is unlikely to produce indigenously enough weapons-grade material for a 
deliverable nuclear weapon until] the last half of this decade. Baghdad could 
shorten the acquisition timeline significantly if it were able to procure fissile 
material abroad. uO 


e We cannot rule out that Baghdad has procured uranium enrichment capabilities 
that could substantially shorten the amount of time necessary to make a nuclear 
weapon. 


Ballistic Missile Program 


Compelling information reveals that Iraq is developing a ballistic missile capability 
that exceeds the 150-km range limitation established under UNSCR 687. During the 
1980s, Iraq purchased 819 Scud B missiles from the USSR. Hundreds of these 300-km- 
range missiles were used to attack Iranian cities during the Iran-Jraq War. Beginning in 
1987, Iraq converted many of these Soviet Scuds into extended-range variants, some of 
which were fired at Tehran, some launched during the Gulf war, and others remaining in. 
Iraq’s inventory at war’s end. Iraq admitted filling at least 75 of its Scud warheads with 
chemical or biological agents and deployed these weapons for use against coalition forces 
and regional opponents including Israel in 1991. 


Most of the approximately 90 Scud-type missiles Saddam fired at Israel, Saudi Arabia, 


and Bahrain during the Gulf war were al-Husayn variants that the Iraqis modified by 
lengthening the airframe and increasing fuel capacity, extending the range to 650 km. 


15 


traq: Nuclear-Related Facilities ; 


BAP Ee oc 


aa 
sya Sar et 


ater 
iota 
ae i 


Al Jazirah uranium 
@ feedstock factory 

4 é 

\: 


; 


Ege 
Pred 
Sa Gas 
yy 
yh hy 


Tarmiyeh 
2B EMIS. (apaioes vi 
Jimeremememna amen, 2 factity Nea ah. PO Santer ste 3 ! 
g Petrochemicai-s Center\ ota 
© office complex _-{{paghoaD 
Al Furat centrity 
& bebit tae 
development center ae y Ey ‘ & 
ANE eE fo ~ gp Tuwaltha Nuciear SX ROE : 
Al Atheer nuciéar wD Aesearch Center se oy 
Be a f toes loin 
weapon A&D center / a 


Conte gt 


1 Cartography CentecMPO 7601C2AN FRO00E7} 6-02 


Baghdad was developing other longer-range missiles based on Scud technology, 
including the 900-km al-Abbas. Iraq was designing follow-on multi-stage and clustered 


' medium-range ballistic missile (MRBM) concepts with intended ranges up to 3,000 km. 


Iraq also had a program to develop a two-stage missile called the Badr-2000 using solid- 
propellants with an estimated range of 750 to 1,000 km. 


e Iraq never fully accounted for its existing missile programs. Discrepancies in 
Baghdad’s declarations suggest that Iraq retains a small force of Scud-type missiles 
and an undetermined number of launchers and warheads. Further, Iraq never 
explained the disposition of advanced missile components, such as guidance and 
control systems, that it could not produce on its own and that would be critical to 
Uevelupenial prugiaiutys. 


Iraqi Ballistic Missiles 


Meters 


° 


eet bay 
Bt . 
OFF ss, 


a ieeeeey 


ad sage 
mated. 


are br a 


od bool 


a ve 
- Vee Tes St SSP Sth 8 a EE 0 y : 
fijing beyond the alowed 180;Rmi range,» - 


a § ae 


ee Sr we 8 


is aed aise i om + x . 
{Pile Al Sammoud is capable of 


Iraq continues to work on UN-authorized short-range ballistic missiles (SRBMs)—those 
with a range no greater than 150 km—that help develop the expertise and infrastructure 
needed to produce longer-range missile systems. The al-Samoud liquid propellant SRBM 
and the Ababil-100 solid propellant SRBM are, however, capable of flying beyond the 
allowed 150 km range. Both missiles are being tested aggressively. Both may be nearing 
operational deployment and appeared on launchers in a military parade on 31 December 
2000 in Baghdad. Other evidence strongly suggests Iraq is modifying missile testing and 
production facilities to produce even longer-range missiles: 


« The Al-Rafah-North Liquid Propellant Engine RDT&E Facility is Iraq’s principal site 
for the static testing of liquid propellant missile engines. Baghdad has been building 


aw. mh he Dale nae Ae Ie Pree dln than tant abamd annnnintad wrth al Gnenand 
a ne Ww toot Trevis Www tana AA7 DUAL GWE CEAGAAA BABY BWUE Weeenane SHI mann ERe FT Reed Bee Eeeneee yens 


engine testing and the defunct Scud engine test stand. The only plausible explanation 
for this test facility is that Iraq intends to test engines for longer-range missiles 
prohibited under UNSCR 687. 


SA-2 (Al Samoud) Engine Test 


18 


4 \. 
_ | Salahadin SE 
pat rs s ~~ 
\ LA it . 
Nasser SE, \ 


ay 


ey 
| AtAmins 


| Saddam SE 
; bec ax 
| At Ratah r AYMaméun>-—~, 
, Al Qa Qaa SE 
} Al Mutasimn 


Ct Cartography Center/MPG 7601034! (RO0667} 9-02 


19 


ah 


IRAQ: Al Mamoun Solid-Propellant Production Plant 


The Al-Mutasim Solid Rocket Motor and Test Facility, previously associated with 
Iraq’s Badr-2000 solid-propellant missile program, has been rebuilt and expanded in 


recent years. The al-Mutasim site supports solid-propellant motor assembly, rework, 


and testing for the UN-authorized Ababil-100, but the size of certain facilities there, 
particularly those newly constructed between the assembly rework and static test 
areas, suggests that Baghdad is preparing to develop systems that are prohibited by 
the UN. 


At the Al-Mamoun Solid Rocket Motor Production Plant and Research, . 
Development, Testing and Evaluation (RDT&E) Facility, the Iraqis, since the 
December 1998 departure of inspectors, have rebuilt structures damaged in the Gulf 
War and dismantled by UNSCOM that were originally built to manufacture solid 


20 


_ propellant motors for the Badr-2000 program. They also have built a new building 
and are reconstructing other buildings originally designed to fill large Badr-2000 
motor casings with solid propellant. 


e Also at al-Mamoun, the Iraqis have rebuilt two structures used to “mix” solid 
propellant for the Badr-2000 missile. The new buildings—about as large as the 
original ones—are ideally suited to house large, UN-prohibited mixers. In fact, the 
only logical explanation for the size and configuration of these mixing buildings is 
that Iraq intends to develop EmEE SBD ES, prohibited missiles. 


Iraq has managed to rebuild aul expand its missile development infrastructure 


-t. 
 UWINUr SUUCtULS. - ibayi MCL CiaLics lays ouugiL piuducuen Woninslogy Ppevrrverveyy te 


tools, and raw materials in violation of the arms embargo. 


e = The Iraqis fave completed a new ammonium perchlorate production plant at Mamoun ” 


that supports Iraq’s solid propellant missile program. Ammonium perchlorate is a 
common oxidizer used in solid propellant missile motors. Baghdad would not have 
been able to complete this facility without help from abroad. 


e In August 1995, Iraq was caught trying to acquire sensitive ballistic missile guidance 
components including gyroscopes originally used in Russian strategic nuclear 
SEBMs. demonstrating that Baghdad has been pursuing proscribed, advanced, long- 
range missile technology for some time. Iraqi officials admitted that, despite 
international prohibitions, they had received a similar shipment earlier that year. 


‘Unmanned Aerial Vehicle Program and Other Aircraft 


Iraq is continuing to develop other platforms capable of delivering chemical and 
biological agents. Immediately before the Gulf War, Baghdad attempted to convert a 
MiG-21 into an unmanned aerial vehicle (UAV) to carry spray tanks capable of 
dispensing chemical or biological agents. UNSCOM assessed that the program to 
develop the spray system was successful, but the conversion of the MiG-21 was not. 
More recently, Baghdad has attempted to convert the L-29 jet trainer aircraft into a UAV 
that can be fitted with the CBW spray tanks, inmost likely a continuation of previous 


efforts with the MiG-21. Although much less sophisticated than ballistic missiles as a 


delivery platform,.an aircraft, manned or unmanned, is the most efficient way to 
disseminate chemical and biological weapons over a large, distant area. 


e Iraq already has produced modified drop-tanks that can disperse biological or 
chemical agents effectively. Before the Gulf war, the Iraqis successfully 
experimented with aircraft-mounted spray tanks capable of releasing up to 2,000 liters 

- of an anthrax simulant over a target area. Iraq also has modified commercial crop | 
sprayers successfully and tested them with an anthrax simulant delivered from 
helicopters. 


21 


“4 


traql L-29 UAV Test-Bed Aircraft at Samarra East Airbase 


e “Baghdad has a history of experimenting with a variety of unmanned platforms. Iraq’s 
use of newer, more capable airframes would increase range and payload, while 
smaller platforms might be harder to detect and therefore more survivable. This ° 
capability represents a serious threat to Iraq’s netghbors and to international military 


forces in the region. 


e Iraq used tactical fighter aircraft and helicopters to deliver chemical agents, loaded in 
bombs and rockets, during the Iran-Iraq war. Baghdad probably is considering again 
using manned aircraft as delivery platforms depending on the operational scenario. 


Procurement in Support of WMD Programs 


Traq has been able to import dual-use, WMD-relevant equipment and material through - 
procurements both within and outside the UN sanctions regime. Baghdad diverts some 
of the $10 billion worth of goods now entering Iraq every year for humanitarian 
needs to support the military and WMD programs instead. 


e UN monitors at Iraq's borders do not inspect the cargo—worth hundreds of millions 
of dollars—that enters Iraq every year outside of the Oil-for-Food program; some of 
these goods clearly support Iraq's military and WMD programs. For example, 
Baghdad imports fiber-optic communication systems cue? of UN auspices to 
support the Iraqi military. 


22 


San, at arn nT pp De Tae Fo TE ROLE 


Test of dissemination of BW agents from a modified drop tank carried by a Mirage F1. The drop tank was filfed 
with 10060 liters of slurry Bacifus subtilis, a simulant for 8. anthracis, and disseminated over Abu Obeydi Airbase in 
January. 1991, The photo is trom a videotape provided by iraq to UNSCOM. 


23 


e Iraq imports goods using planes, trains, trucks, and ships without any type of 
international inspections—in violation of UN Security Council resolutions. 


Even within the UN-authorized Oil-for-Food program, Iraq does not hide the fact that it 
wants to purchase military and WMD-related goods. For example, Baghdad diverted 
UN-approved trucks for military purposes and construction equipment to 
rehabilitate WMD-affiliated facilities, even though these items were approved only 
to help the civilian population. 


e Iraq has been able to repair modern industrial machine tools that previously supported 
production of WMD or missile components and has imported additional tools that it _ 
may use to reconstitute Baghdad's unconvenuonai weapons arscusal, 


On several occasions, Iraq has asked to purchase goods—such as neutron generators 
‘and servo valves—that the UN Monitoring, Verification, and Inspection Commission 
(UNMOVIC) views as linchpins for Iraqi prohibited programs; alternative, non-dual- 
use items would serve the civilian purpose purportedly intended for this equipment. 


UNMOVIC began screening contracts pursuant to UN Security Council Resolution 1284 
in December 1999 and since has identified more than 100 contracts containing dual-use 
items as defined in UNSCR 1051 that can be diverted into WMD programs. UNMOVIC 
also has requested that suppliers provide technical information on hundreds of other 

_ goods because of concerns about potential misuse of dual-use equipment. In many cases, 
Iraq has requested technology that clearly exceeds requirements for the stated 
commercial end-use when it easily could substitute items that could not be used for 


WMD. 
o On‘some UN contracts, Baghdad claimed that the requested goods are designed to 


rehabilitate facilities—such as the Al Qa'im phosphate plant and Fallujah—that in the 
past were used to support both industrial and WMD programs. 


24 


